# Hello there

I've prepared this in case I get sick or just too lazy to speak during
the workshop, so that you won't be left high and dry.

### If you've worked before with LVM/ZFS

Here's a table comparing terms:

  Human                         Btrfs                       LVM                ZFS
  ----------------------------- --------------------------- ------------------ -------------------------------------------------------
  group of disks                volume                      volume group       pool
  mountable 'device'            volume *and* subvolume      logical volume     dataset
  swap space                    N/A                         `mkswap`           `zvols`
  *shrink* total usable space   `filesystem resize`         `pvchange`         N/A
  RO and RW snapshots           `subvolume snapshot`        many               RO only - `snapshot`
  Deduplication                 automatic, async only       none               automatic, sync only
  Copy-on-Write                 default on, linear time/s   pace manual, slo   w (sub-FS level) auto (default on), linear time/space

### What Btrfs brings to the table over ZFS

Just drop LVM already.

1.  GPL license
2.  Minimal fixed metadata -- convert Ext2/3/4 (most common FS in
    GNU/Linux distros) to Btrfs in-place
3.  Online defragmentation and filesystem check
4.  Subvolumes and snapshots
5.  Built-in RAID
6.  Per-file checksum and healing
7.  🅱-treeees.

## Creating a filesystem inside a file

You'll need this for all we're doing today. If you want, you can create
a partition in your main drive and/or a thumb drive via Gparted or
`fdisk`/`gdisk` (or their TUI counterparts).

Given that in UNIX systems *everything* is a file (including the monitor
or printer you are reading this from), we can make a filesystem inside a
normal file. The instructions create one in `/tmp` so that there's no
trace of these operations after reboot.

``` {.sh}
# work on a temporary directory; files usually deleted on reboot
mkdir /tmp/bfs && cd /tmp/bfs
# create file used for filesystem and set its size to 500M
truncate -s 500m filefs
# create the filesystem
mkfs.btrfs filefs
# create the mountpoint for the filesystem
mkdir fsmnt
# actually mount the file as a complete filesystem ("loopback device")
# root access is required for specifying options
sudo mount -o loop filefs fsmnt
```

## Creating/deleting subvolumes

A subvolume is similar to an LVM logical volume or a ZFS partition. Root
access is required, since you're modifying a root-mounted device.

``` {.sh}
sudo btrfs subvolume create <subvol_name>
```

``` {.sh}
# rm -rf on the subvolume path could work, but takes way too much time
sudo btrfs subvolume delete <subvol_name>
```

## Moving/editing subvolumes/filesystem

-   Resize: `sudo btrfs filesystem resize [+/-]<size>[max] <path>`
-   Sync for clean changes: `sudo btrfs filesystem sync <path>`
-   Find FS usage ('disk free'): `sudo btrfs filesystem df <path>`
-   Find new files in subvolume:
    `sudo btrfs subvolume find-new <subvol_name> <last_gen`
-   Set default subvolume to mount:
    `sudo btrfs subvolume set-default <subvol_name>|<subvolid> <path>`
-   List subvolumes: `sudo btrfs subvolume list <path>`
-   Add device to volume:
    `sudo btrfs filesystem add <devpath> <volpath>`
    -   Remember to balance the volume data after adding a new device:
        `sudo btrfs filesystem balance <volpath>`
-   Remove a device: `sudo btrfs filesystem delete <devpath>`
-   Remove all reverences to deleted devices:
    `sudo btrfs filesystem delete missing`

## Snapshots

``` {.sh}
sudo btrfs subvolume snapshot [-r] <subvol_name> <snapshot_name>
```

Specify `-r` for a read-only snapshot, else read-write. Nothing else
needed to work.

## Moving entire volumes through standard output/input (tar backup)

`sudo btrfs send -c <old-snapshot> <snapshot> | ssh laptop@backup.host "btrfs receive"`

## Tips/trivia

**All** Btrfs subvolumes have a name and a \>0 ID, except the root
subvolume (ID=0, no name). All tools manipulating Btrfs volumes
themselves (and not their contents) modify subvolumes by name, so the
root subvolume is by all means unmodifiable. What one could do instead,
is create a subvolume right under root and use that as the default for
everything (ID=5, *but why?*).

Ideal setup for a desktop workstation: RAID0 data and RAID1 metadata
with daily snapshots, weekly off-site backup (incremental, of course),
with `zstd` compression.

## Links

-   [Original OverlayFS
    proposal](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/overlayfs.txt)
-   [Btrfs kernel.org wiki
    page](https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page)
-   [LKML discussion on choice of
    B-trees](https://lkml.org/lkml/2010/6/18/144)
-   [Don'ts and other spicy
    things](https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Gotchas)
